Newsletters: add 272 (2023-10-11) (#1345)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2023-10-11-newsletter.md

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #272'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2023/10/11/
name: 2023-10-11-newsletter
slug: 2023-10-11-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter FIXME:harding

## News

- **Specification for `OP_TXHASH` proposed:** Steven Roose [posted][roose
  txhash] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list a [draft BIP][bips #1500] for

>   a new `OP_TXHASH` opcode.  The idea of behind this opcode has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a new `OP_TXHASH` opcode.  The idea behind this opcode has been
```

  to several megabytes of data every time the opcode is invoked.
  Roose's draft includes a sample implementation of the opcode.

## Bitcoin Core PR Review Club

*In this monthly section, we summarize a recent [Bitcoin Core PR Review
Club][] meeting, highlighting some of the important questions and
answers.  Click on a question below to see a summary of the answer from
the meeting.*

[util: Type-safe transaction identifiers][review club 28107] is a PR
by Niklas Gögge (dergoegge) that improves type safety by introducing
separate types for `txid` (the transaction identifier or hash that
doesn't include the segwit witness data) and `wtxid` (same but includes
the witness data), rather than both being represented by a `uint256`
(a 256-bit integer, which can contain a SHA256 hash). This PR
should have no operational effect; it aims to prevent future
programming errors in which one kind of transaction ID is used where
the other was intended. Such errors will be detected at compile time.

To minimize disruption and ease review, these new types will initially
be used in only one area of the code (the transaction "orphanage");

> future PRs will deploy the new types to other areas of the codebase.

Reviewer 2: I'm taking this suggestion except (nit) I think "use" is better than "utilize" because "use" refers to making use of something within its limitations, whereas "utilize" indicates using something beyond its main intended purpose.

{% include functions/details-list.md
  q0="What does it mean for a transaction identifier to be type-safe?
      Why is that important or helpful? Are there any downsides?"
  a0="A transaction identifier is considered type-safe when it undergoes

>       rigorous type-checking during compile-time, guaranteeing that

Reviewer 3: Seems to be a copy-paste of one of the answers?

Reviewer 2: It is... but it seemed really good. It does seem a little, what's the word, formal or formulaic, so I'll work on it, thanks.

      operations involving these identifiers are thoroughly validated
      and constrained to their intended uses before the program is
      executed, thus preventing type-related errors and ensuring
      program reliability. No downsides were noted."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-38"

  q1="Rather than the new class types `Txid` and a `Wtxid` _inheriting_
      from `uint256`, should they  _include_ (wrap) a `uint256`?
      What are the tradeoffs?"
  a1="Those classes could do that, but it would cause much more code
      churn (many more source lines would need to be touched)."

>   a1link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-43"

Reviewer 4: Maybe 

```suggestion
  a1link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-39"
```

  q2="Why is it better to enforce types at compile-time instead of at
      run-time?"
  a2="Developers discover errors quickly as they're coding, rather
      than relying on writing extensive test suites to catch bugs in runtime
      (and these tests may still miss some errors). However, testing would

>       still be useful since type safety won't prevent consistent use of the
>       wrong type of transaction ID (but consistently) in the first place."

Reviewer 3: consistent (but consistently)
```suggestion
      still be useful since type safety won't prevent consistent use of the
      wrong type of transaction ID in the first place."
```

  a2link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-67"

  q3="Conceptually, when writing new code that requires referring to
      transactions, when should you use `txid` and when should you use
      `wtxid`? Can you point to any examples in the code where using one
      instead of the other could be very bad?"
  a3="In general, use of `wtxid` is preferred since it commits to the

>       entire transaction. An important exception is the `prevout`
>       reference from each input to the output (UTXO) it's spending.
>       It must be a `txid` to retain compatibility with pre-segwit nodes.
>       (Note that it's not possible for only upgraded segwit nodes to use
>       `wtxid` here, because this would change the `txid` of the spending
>       transaction.)

Reviewer 3: "compatibility" suggests to me that there is another way of referencing prevouts in post-segwit nodes.
The note doesn't really make sense to me - why would segwit nodes reincorporate witnesses into prevouts, seems to defeat the purpose/definition of segwit?
```suggestion
      entire transaction. An important exception is the `prevout`
      reference from each input to the output (UTXO) it's spending,
      which specify transactions by txid.
```

      An example of where it's important to use one and not the other is

>       given [here][wtxid example]."

Reviewer 4: Might be worth a slight explanation of the dangers in that example. (Although its also noted in the IRC logs, so maybe not?).

Reviewer 2: I don't understand it well enough, if someone wants to suggest something, great, otherwise, I think it's okay as is.

  a3link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-85"

  q4="In which concrete way(s) could using `transaction_identifier` instead
      of `uint256` help find existing bugs or prevent the introduction of
      new ones? On the other hand, could this change introduce new bugs?"
  a4="Without this PR, a function that takes a `uint256` argument (such as
      a block ID hash) could be passed a `txid`.
      With this PR, this causes a compile-time error."
  a4link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-128"

  q5="The [`GenTxid`][GenTxid] class already exists. How does it
      already enforce type correctness, and how is it different from the
      approach in this PR?"
  a5="This class includes a hash and a flag indicating if the hash is a
      `wtxid` or a `txid`, so it's still a single type rather than two
      distinct types. This allows type checking, but it must be explicitly
      programmed, and, more importantly, can only be done at run-time,

>       not compile-time."

Reviewer 3: Maybe also mention the use case of being able to pass both, but still specifying which type. https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-176

  a5link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-161"

  q6="How is `transaction_identifier` able to subclass `uint256`, given
      that, in C++, integers are types and not classes?"
  a6="Because `uint256` is itself a class, rather than a built-in type.
      (The largest built-in C++ integer type is 64 bits.)"
  a6link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-194"

>   q7="Does a `uint256` behaves otherwise the same as, for example, a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  q7="Does a `uint256` behave otherwise the same as, for example, a
```

      `uint64_t?`"
  a7="No, arithmetic operations aren't permitted on `uint256` because
      they don't make sense for hashes (which is the main use of `uint256`).
      The name is misleading; it's really just a blob of 256 bits.
      A separate `arith_uint256 ` allows arithmetic (used, for example,
      in PoW calculations)."
  a7link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-203"

  q8="Why does `transaction_identifier` subclass `uint256` instead of
      being a completely new type?"

>   a8="It allows us to use explicit and implicit conversions to leave

Reviewer 4: Maybe? 
```suggestion
  a8="It allows us to use explicit and implicit conversions and to leave
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we're making two separate points here; the conversions allow us to leave some code unchanged. UUIC, it's better as is.

projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

- FIXME:harding to update Tuesday

## Notable code and documentation changes

*Notable changes this week in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo], [Core
Lightning][core lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LDK][ldk repo],
[LND][lnd repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo], [Hardware Wallet
Interface (HWI)][hwi repo], [Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay
Server][btcpay server repo], [BDK][bdk repo], [Bitcoin Improvement
Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo], and
[Bitcoin Inquisition][bitcoin inquisition repo].*

- [Bitcoin Core #27596][bitcoin core #27596] finishes the first phase
  of the [assumeutxo][topic assumeutxo] project containing all the
  remaining changes necessary to both use an assumedvalid snapshot
  chainstate and do a full validation sync in the background. It
  makes UTXO snapshots loadable via RPC (`loadtxoutset`) and adds
  `assumeutxo` parameters to chainparams.

    While the feature set will not be available on mainnet until
    [activated][bitcoin core #28553], this merge marks the culmination of

>     a multi-year effort. [Proposed in 2018][assumeutxo core dev] and

Author: Going to change "Proposed in 2018" to "The project was proposed in 2018".  The fundamental idea behind assumeutxo---download only the current chainstate---dates back to early Bitcoin and (it seems to me) may be the idea Nakamoto was trying to work towards in section 7 of his original paper.  After sipa implemented ultraprune (creating the modern chainstate) something like 10 years ago, people have been copying around their chainstates to skip IBD---BTCPay even offers this as a [feature](https://docs.btcpayserver.org/FAQ/Synchronization/#can-i-skip-the-synchronization).

AssumeUTXO as a project took what had been previously proposed and haphazardly implemented and did it in a way that addressed most of the concerns about the idea, making it much more usable and secure.  I think we want to make clear that it's that part which was proposed in 2018, not the much older idea of just copying around the current system state.

>     [formalized by James O'Beirne in 2019][assumeutxo 2019 mailing list],

Author: We don't include names in the merges section of the newsletter.  The idea is that getting a PR to merge requires a team effort, so mentioning specific names without mentioning everyone involved (which is impractical for most PRs) is potentially discouraging to the unnamed contributors.

I don't know that this is really a good policy and I'm open to discussing it, but it's the policy we've used so far, so I'm going to drop O'Beirne's name from here.  (That said, what James did by continuing to work on AssumeUTXO year after year, through job transitions, jobs falling through, a pandemic, and the soul-crushing slow pace of Bitcoin Core review deserves to be celebrated.  Loudly.  Dedication like that inspires me more than I can express here.)

Reviewer 3: >  The idea is that getting a PR to merge requires a team effort, so mentioning specific names without mentioning everyone involved (which is impractical for most PRs) is potentially discouraging to the unnamed contributors.

I wholeheartedly agree and like this policy a lot!

  q5="The [`GenTxid`][GenTxid] class already exists. How does it
      already enforce type correctness, and how is it different from the
      approach in this PR?"
  a5="This class includes a hash and a flag indicating if the hash is a
      `wtxid` or a `txid`, so it's still a single type rather than two
      distinct types. This allows type checking, but it must be explicitly
      programmed, and, more importantly, can only be done at run-time,
      not compile-time. It satisfies the frequent use case of wanting
      to take input that can be either kind of identifier. For this reason,
      this PR doesn't remove `GenTxid`. A better alternative for the
      future might be `std::variant<Txid, Wtxid>`."
  a5link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-161"

  q6="How is `transaction_identifier` able to subclass `uint256`, given
      that, in C++, integers are types and not classes?"
  a6="Because `uint256` is itself a class, rather than a built-in type.
      (The largest built-in C++ integer type is 64 bits.)"
  a6link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-194"

  q7="Does a `uint256` behave otherwise the same as, for example, a

>       `uint64_t?`"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      `uint64_t`?"
```

  a7="No, arithmetic operations aren't permitted on `uint256` because
      they don't make sense for hashes (which is the main use of `uint256`).
      The name is misleading; it's really just a blob of 256 bits.

>       A separate `arith_uint256 ` allows arithmetic (used, for example,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      A separate `arith_uint256` allows arithmetic (used, for example,
```

      in PoW calculations)."
  a7link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-203"

  q8="Why does `transaction_identifier` subclass `uint256` instead of
      being a completely new type?"
  a8="It allows us to use explicit and implicit conversions to leave
      code that is expecting a transaction ID in the form of a `uint256`
      unchanged until it's an appropriate time to refactor to use the new,
      stricter `Txid` or `Wtxid` types."
  a8link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/28107#l-219"
%}

## Releases and release candidates

*New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

- [LDK 0.0.117][] is a release of this library for building LN-enabled

>   applications.  It inclues security bug fixes related to the [anchor

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  applications.  It includes security bug fixes related to the [anchor
```

  chainstate and do a full validation sync in the background. It
  makes UTXO snapshots loadable via RPC (`loadtxoutset`) and adds
  `assumeutxo` parameters to chainparams.

    Although the feature set will not be available on mainnet until
    [activated][bitcoin core #28553], this merge marks the culmination of
    a multi-year effort. The project, [proposed in 2018][assumeutxo core dev] and
    [formalized in 2019][assumeutxo 2019 mailing list],
    will significantly improve the user experience of new full
    nodes first coming onto the network. Follow-ups of the merge include
    [Bitcoin Core #28590][bitcoin core #28590],
    [#28562][bitcoin core #28562], and [#28589][bitcoin core #28589].

- [Bitcoin Core #28331][], [#28588][bitcoin core #28588],
  [#28577][bitcoin core #28577], and [GUI #754][bitcoin core gui #754]
  add support for [version 2 encrypted P2P transport][topic v2 p2p
  transport] as specified in [BIP324][].  The feature is currently
  disabled by default but can be enabled using the `-v2transport`
  option.

    Encrypted transport helps improve the privacy of Bitcoin users by
    preventing passive observers (such as ISPs) from directly

>     determining what transactions nodes relay to their peers.  It's also

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    determining which transactions nodes relay to their peers.  It's also
```
